the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
hmm
yeah let's show the answer
all right for a special special treat
special benefit I'm not sure what to
call it something special later in the
class does someone want to tell me why
that's the right answer well as we did
last lecture we crossed off the k2
because that's the slow step so it
doesn't matter as much yep and so when
you get rid of of that when the K minus
one is really fast compared to k2 k2 is
very small compared to that so you get
rid of it and that simplifies the
expression
okay so temperature today's lecture is
largely about temperature but we're
gonna tie in all sorts of other things
we've learned over over the course of
the semester so I'm very excited some of
my very favorite topics are coming back
today all right so effective temperature
we talked about this a little bit when
we're talking about making bread adding
your baking soda and about rates and why
you put things in the oven and we talked
about it has to do with also the
spontaneity whether you change the
temperature and what your Delta H and
Delta s are but we also talked about
rates and that increasing the
temperature often increases the rate so
many of us have observed this you
increase the temperature you increase
the rate but today we're going to talk
about how you can quantitatively say how
much the rate might be changed the rate
constant might be changed if you
increase the temperature so in 1889 it
was a wonderful day for Aranea s-- he
had been trying to plot different
different values of rate constants
versus temperature and to see what would
happen and then he tried natural log of
the rate constant K versus inverse
temperature and he got a straight line
and scientists always get very excited
when your data falls on a straight line
it means you figured out some
relationship between
values so here is the Iranian and we'll
introduce some terms so again replying
the natural log of K versus 1 over
temperature 1 over inverse Kelvin over
here and here is our plot of this
straight line that Irenaeus found
natural log of K on the y-axis versus 1
over T gives you a slope then of minus
the activation energy so e to the little
a is activation energy over R our good
friend the gas constant and then the
y-intercept over here is the natural log
of something called a we have a lot of
different A's in this particular unit of
kinetics this one is factor a sometimes
called the Aranea
they for Irenaeus it has a couple of
different names but importantly it is
the same units as k our rate constants
so what this plot told Irenaeus back in
1889 was that rate constants vary
exponentially with inverse temperature
so this was the first kind of connection
between rate constants and temperature
that could be used to kind of come up
with quantitative numbers so factor a
this iranian factor and the activation
energy e to the sub a depend on the
reaction being studied so they have to
be measured for the particular reaction
so it's a clicker competition so we'll
have a bunch of clicker questions today
and why don't you tell me if you think
factor a is temperature dependent
all right ten more seconds
yep the answer is no and so what is this
factor a if we think about this in terms
of the plot what it is is the rate
constant when one over T is equal to
zero because it is the y-intercept
and when one over T is equal to zero
what it has to be true about T yeah
infinitely large so factor a is that
it's the rate constant at the at an
infinitely large temperature at a huge
huge temperature so it's the fastest
that particular reaction could ever go
at this infinitely huge temperature so
that's what factor a is and of course we
can't you know plug things in and say
how fast is this at an infinitely huge
temperature so conveniently you can get
that value out of plotting your data you
measure a bunch of rate constants versus
temperature and you plot it this way and
you can calculate this sort of maximum
rate constant possible for this reaction
if you had this infinitely huge
temperature okay what about activation
energy do you think that's temperature
dependent
all right ten more seconds
so no it isn't and so if we sort of just
think about it back here the answer is
no again you plot the rate constants
over all these temperatures to get one
value out of the slope so it is largely
independent of any kind of temperature
you get one activation energy for the
reaction in question but it does depend
on the reaction for sure there isn't
just one value for this for everything
it depends on the materials alright so
let's look at some other ways that we
can express the Irenaeus equation so we
have the Irenaeus equation written as a
straight line and we can also do
something very very simple to it which
is switch these two terms and that gives
us what is officially known as the
Irenaeus equation so natural log of k
equals natural log of a this Aranea soar
factor a minus the activation energy
over the gas constant times temperature
and of course if you want to solve for K
you take the inverse log of both sides
and so then K is going to be equal to
this factor a again measured for every
reaction in question e to the minus ei
the activation energy over RT so here's
our equations these will be on equation
sheet so you don't have to memorize them
but you already if you've been studying
your equation sheet for exam 4 realize
that there's a lot of symbols that are
very similar in these units so we have a
in nuclear chemistry activity so just
keep in mind what equation is what when
you're talking about nuclear decay
you're not have your activation energy
term so that should give you somewhat of
a clue
all right so one of the challenges in
the final is making sure you know which
equation is which so let's look at an
example now where if we're giving some
of the information we can solve for
other things so an example this is a
classes at lunchtime so we can think
about the hydrolyse
if you know an average lunch of sucrose
to form a molecule of glucose and a
molecule of fructose as part of the
digestive process so some of you might
have I'm eatin already you might be
digesting sucrose it comes in many
different forms right now so using the
information about activation energy we
can predict what the rate constants
going to be at a different temperature
so some kind person measured the
activation energy for this digestive
process at 108 kilojoules per mole and
also figured out that the observed K
observed observed rate constant for this
reaction is 1.0 times 10 to the minus 3
molar per per molar per second at normal
body temperature and so now we're asked
to calculate what that rate constant
should be at lower temperature 35
degrees Celsius somewhat below body
temperature so how are we going to do
that well let's remind ourselves of our
equations or a radius equation so we we
know what ei is we were not told what
our rainiest factor a is we don't know
that but we do know one of the rate
constants at one of the temperatures so
if we combine these two equations then
we can then we don't we have an
appropriate number of variables to solve
for the second rate constant at the new
temperature so let's combine those two
equations so we have natural log of of
k2 our rate constant at temperature 2
minus the natural log of the rate
constant temperature 1 which can also be
expressed as natural log rate constant 2
over rate constant 1 and our natural log
of the Iranian Saud and so we have minus
EA or activation energy over our gas
constant times 1 over the second
temperature minus 1 over the first
temperature so we can put in our values
that were given so we have our first
rate constant down here the rate
constant at the first temperature we put
in our temperatures
making sure we convert them to Kelvin
because our gas constant is in Kelvin
and also we are going to convert our
activation energy from kilojoules to
joules because we want to cancel our
units so now we can cancel joules we can
cancel moles and we can cancel Kelvin
and so that gives us a new rate constant
seven point six times ten to the minus
four per molar per second and this is a
lower rate at a lower temperature and in
fact that is often true you have a lower
rate at a lower temperature and this is
one of the reasons why it's a really
good idea to keep your body temperature
at body temperature and around this time
of year people come in to MIT from
warmer climates and they do not have
appropriate clothing and so your body
does not work well in the cold the rate
slowed down you're not digesting things
your body is really not doing anything
at the rate it's supposed to be doing
these reactions because they're nicely
tuned to the appropriate body
temperature so go out and buy a winter
coat okay so this now this equation that
we just derived shows us the
relationship between rate constants and
temperature so again natural log k2 over
k1 minus the activation energy over the
gas constant and our temperature term
and if we look at this equation we'll
realize that if we have a very large
value for this activation energy
this EA term here that's gonna mean that
the rate constants are very sensitive to
temperature if this is small there won't
be a big difference between k1 and k2
but if the activation energy is really
big there'll be a big difference between
k1 and k2
the rate constants will be very
sensitive to temperature all right so
now let's think about rates and
temperature and let's think of a cold
temperature let's think for example of
liquid nitrogen temperatures what do you
think happens to an enzyme you have
enzymes in your die
justif process that are hydrolyzing
sucrose that you might have had for
lunch
what do you think happens to enzymes if
you put them in liquid nitrogen
temperature they will slow way down one
would say they would stop working
entirely they would just sort of be
recall of frozen and in fact I use this
all the time in my research so one thing
we do we study the structures of
proteins and so we grow these lovely
protein crystals and what we can do we
take these a lot of times the proteins
or enzymes and the crystals are active
they're able to convert reactants to
products and so we could soak in
reactants and then take our crystals and
dunk them in liquid nitrogen and then
determine the structure of that and if
we do it at different time points you
can actually kind of walk through the
mechanism of the enzyme watch what
happens at various different states so
this is a very common thing that's used
we like to do things that liquid
nitrogen to see things are slow to see
you know we sort of pause it when it's
dunked in liquid nitrogen it stops what
it's doing and we can capture its
structure all right what do you think
about non enzymatic reactions do you
think they're also going to be slowed
down I don't know should we do an
experiment and find out yeah I think we
should okay so we now have let's bring
out our demo TAS we now have glow sticks
glow sticks are in fact chemicals in
there that when you break them you have
a chemical reaction so we're going to
we're going to do this and we're gonna
break them and watch them glow let's uh
let's let's break them and put them in
here first and then we're gonna cool
them down and see what happens to the
chemical reaction here let's have let's
have a little help over here who knows
to break some of these
hey brave just kind of snap them and
then shake them up and I think will
bring down bring down the lights so you
can all see these pretty well all right
so so now the chemical reaction is going
and so we can see the chemical reaction
that's what's wonderful about glow
sticks you can observe the chemical
reaction because it causes it to glow
move so so everyone can see all right
now we're going to see what happens to
the chemical reaction when it slows
again when the chemical reaction is
slowed down you won't see it anymore so
it'll stop flowing
that should be good okay all right let's
do the we'll do all of them and we'll
see it I take a little bit of time but
it should not be too long
and hopefully it'll slow down faster
than the liquid-nitrogen destroys the
plastic cups yeah I think you can see it
with the first one now
all right Mary wait you come down here
we have something else for you to do
alright let's put some liquid nitrogen
in here
all right let's bring up the lights
because our glowing has stopped so
another thing that liquid nitrogen
changes the properties so Mary will
demonstrate to you what happens to a
flower and just kind of just like right
now the flower does this but let's put
it in liquid nitrogen and see what
happens give it a decent soak
and now smash it all right I have thank
you very much a lovely assistant all
right I will brush off my computer later
we have more flowers and apparently
there's a broom somewhere so if we
finish class for some lucky other
individuals you can come down and smash
the rest of the flowers so liquid
nitrogen really changes the property of
things you know sometimes it's used in
by dermatologists to remove warts or
other things that like dab some liquid
nitrogen on you and I always feel like
you know paying a lot of money to go
like have that done if liquid nitrogen
around my lab that I'm like yeah I
probably have enough liquid nitrogen
burns on my fingers already that I don't
want crystallographers who use this a
lot they'll often be in a situation
where you have this liquid nitrogen and
it's sort of like dripping on you but
you have your crystal and if you let go
then you'll destroy your crystal
experiment so you're like have liquid
nitrogen sitting in your palm and you're
like okay I'm gonna get a burn or I'm
gonna lose my crystal and so you decide
how important that is and so sometimes a
crystallographer walk up to you and you
go see that scar that's one point two
angstrom data baby right there so we
suffer for our science sometimes all
right so liquid nitrogen is very changed
as a property cold things are different
than warm things by a winter coat okay
so everything slows down in the cold in
terms of elementary reactions are rate
constants slow down all right so now
let's think about a reaction in what's
called the reaction coordinate and
consider what's happening in a reaction
and then we're going to come back to
thinking about the effect of temperature
where temperature really makes a
difference all right
Oh quiet down a little so considering
the reaction coordinate reaction
coordinate means the court the reactions
of the you have your bring your
reactants together and form your product
so two things coming together to form
something else that is a reaction and as
you go along in the reaction that's your
reaction coordinate and we're going to
also introduce this term of activation
complex or transition state all right so
two molecules can collide two molecules
colliding by molecular but every time
those two molecules come together
they're not necessarily going to form
product Y so only when that collision
energy is greater than some critical
energy which is something is called
eeeem in this sort of minimum energy to
get this reaction to go or as I like to
call it the activation energy EA that's
what we've been talking about our
activation energy will you get a
reaction so you need to have enough
energy and your two things coming
together those two things coming
together need to have a critical energy
for them to react okay so why is this
true you need to have that critical
energy but why why is this necessary so
it's necessary because before this
reaction takes place even if it's a very
happy reaction things need to occur so
the two things coming together need to
often distort bonds might have to be
broken and newborns need to be formed
and while that is occurring while
there's distortion of the bond or bonds
are breaking you need to have some
potential energy to do that you need
some energy to make that reaction go so
the potential energy of the system
increases first while these distortions
are happening so the encounter then
between them you form some activated
complex or what's known as a transition
state
and that activated complex it can go on
to form a molecule or from that
activated complex the two molecules may
just go apart again so what determines
whether they're going to go on happily
to form their complex or going to depart
from each other never to form a larger
molecule and the thing that determines
the fate is that critical energy so only
those molecules with got sufficient
energy to allow for those bond
distortions and rearrangements will be
able to go on and make this and and you
can think about this I think you know in
terms of a couple of relationship that
there's always some work that has to go
into it it's never perfect and if you
put in this effort in this work you can
go on and if you don't really have it in
your like you walk away you don't have
that critical energy you don't have that
that special overcome that activation
energy and you go back so let's just
take a look at some molecules checking
each other out and figuring out if they
have what it takes if they have that
critical energy let's let's watch and
see what happens here they come they're
finding each other they're circling each
other and oh my goodness they had the
critical energy necessary and they
formed a bigger yellow molecule there
they go what a happy ending all right
so only those molecules that have that
critical energy can go on and form their
complex and so here is where temperature
comes into play here's where temperature
becomes really important because they
need to have a certain amount of energy
and there's a relationship between the
kinetic energy of molecules and their
temperature so let's take a look at this
plot over here so this is on one axis
fraction of molecules and on the other
axis we have kinetic energy so if you're
at low temperature over here most of
your molecules are going to have a low
kinetic energy but it will tail off and
there will be some molecules
we'll have a higher energy and if this
line here represents that minimum energy
that critical energy or that activation
energy in blue here we have those low
temperature molecules only a very small
fraction of those will have the energy
to react will be able to overcome that
minimum energy that critical energy
needed now if you're at high temperature
more molecules have a higher kinetic
energy and if you see over here shaded
in orange way more molecules have that
critical energy have the energy
necessary to distort those bonds and go
on to make a molecule all right so
here's this where temperature is
important so kinetic energy pass it on
all right so let's draw some reaction
coordinates and think about what's going
on yeah
yeah yeah so if you're talking about the
forward reaction and the backward
reaction of things whether it's subala
kazar coming together to form things or
a molecules breaking apart there's a
critical energy both directions and
we'll see that actually it's a good
question that kind of leads us in to our
reaction coordinate diagram all right so
most of this is in your notes there's a
few things that are not but let's look
at a reaction coordinate diagram and by
that I mean we have potential energy or
PE on one side and on the other axis we
have what's called just the reaction
coordinate so if you're asked to draw a
reaction coordinate diagram at a problem
set on an exam asking for potential
energy versus reaction coordinate
now our reactants are going to have a
particular amount of potential energy
and in this case it's up here and our
products are going to have some
potential energy down here and there'll
be a difference in energy between these
our Delta e but these reactants aren't
just going to be able to go to products
without overcoming some kind of critical
energy so before they can go down there
they need to go up here so we have the
activation energy comma F for a forward
direction also if you're down in
products and you want to go back to
reactants there's also a barrier that
you have to become and it's not just
this it's all the way up here and so
this would be the activation energy of
the reverse reaction
this dashed line on the top is our
transition state or activated complex
both are two expressions that are used
kind of interchangeably alright so this
transition state some kind of weird
mixture where they've come together and
they're sort of breaking and distorting
it's not our fferent final products
that's down here but you need to go up
in energy overcome an activation energy
barrier so the transition here you need
to go up and then you go down alright so
now let's think about all of these
energy terms and what's true is that the
change in energy this change in energy
between reactants and products is equal
to our activation energy for our forward
reaction minus the activation energy of
the reverse reaction and this Delta e
over here can be measured from a
calorimetry experiment and you might
recall back we're talking about
thermodynamics that e is kind of closely
related to Delta H so we had this
equation at one point that that Delta
Delta H is equal to Delta e plus the
change in PV and we said that for gases
there's about a 1 to 2% difference
between Delta H and Delta e but for
solids and liquids it's pretty much the
same so you can think about this Delta e
like you're thinking about Delta H for
the most part all right so now for this
we if we have some of the numbers if you
know activation energy in the forward
and the reverse you can calculate Delta
e if you know Delta e and one of the
activation energies you can calculate
the other so I'll tell you for this
particular reaction and what these
values are and I was going to bring
color chalk and somehow that didn't
so the activation energy and this is not
in your notes so I'll write it down is
132 kilojoules per mole and I'll also
put it here a little bigger 132
kilojoules per mole and for the reverse
reaction its 358 kilojoules per mole and
minus 358 kilojoules per mole and so if
we do the math here we will calculate
that Delta e is equal to minus 2 to 6
kilojoules per mole so would you expect
that to be an endothermic or exothermic
reaction exothermic right and we can put
that value also in here - two - six
kilojoules per mole so what's really
important here even though it's
exothermic reaction it's not going to
just go without having those molecules
have some critical energy necessary to
overcome this activation energy barrier
you still need energy you need to go up
here before you can go down there so
just sort of thinking about this in
layman's terms this idea of these
activation energy barriers for me
whenever I sit down to write a grant or
write a paper I think wow I sit down in
my computer and my cup of coffee I know
that we're about to get scooped on the
state uh so I really should write this
paper a little stressed about it that I
think wow I could write a lot better if
my office was clean now I hate cleaning
my office
but compared to writing a paper it's
pretty good I don't mind doing it
so then clean
the office then walk the dog maybe do
later some laundry you know lots of
things happen and then eventually you
know you hear from the collaborators
they're like I need this paper now and
you're like oh man
and so that stress gets you over that
activation energy barrier just kind of
pulls you over or you wait till grants
you start six months early and then the
week before it's due suddenly you have
that nervous energy that gets you over
that so many of you have probably
experienced this and you know if you
need you know if you need some extra
help with an activation energy barrier
to do the rest of those extra problems
for exam four you can come talk to me
and I'll stress you out and get you
right over that activation energy
barrier but the thing to keep in mind is
that look at this slope in this case
down here so often it's just that little
something to get you over and then it's
smooth sailing so you know you can work
these games with yourself you just got
to get over it know that once you're
over that barrier it's all going to be
good so you can get yourself over so
that's you know you should never forget
about activation energy barriers there's
always a barrier am i right there's
always some kind of barrier anything
you're gonna do that's worthwhile has
some barrier associated with it all
right so now let's think about the
result of these barriers again coming
back to this idea of temperature so for
an elementary reaction again that's a
reaction that occurs exactly is written
it's a step in an overall reaction
mechanism there's always a barrier
always a barrier barrier is always
positive it's always there and so if you
increase the temperature you're always
going to increase the rate of that
reaction it's always going to help get
over that barrier but increase the
temperature increase the rate but for an
overall reaction temperature is a little
more complicated to predict so if you
increase the
temperature it's not always as clear of
what's gonna happen to the rate this you
can have a lot of different steps
involved that can be exothermic and
endothermic a lot can be happening
changing the temperature changing K so
to think about an overall reaction we
need to understand reaction mechanisms
and that's really convenient because we
just talked about reaction mechanisms on
Monday see y'all know how to write out
reaction mechanisms so let's just
practice all right so for this example
we have two molecules of n o + o2 going
to 2 no2
step one fast and reversible n o + n o
going to an intermediate then the
intermediate is reacting with oxygen
going to two molecules of our product so
we can write the rate of formation a
product based on the slow step or if you
didn't know the slow step on the second
step or the last step so two molecules
again two molecules are being formed k2
times the concentration of the
intermediate times the concentration of
o2 but we have an intermediate so we
need to solve for the intermediate in
terms of react of rate constants
reactants and products but now we're
told we have a fast step followed by a
slow step so we know how to do this and
remember when you have a fast reversible
step followed by a slow step this first
step approximates an equilibrium
reaction there's not much of the
intermediate that's being siphoned off
in the slow step so pretty much when you
form the intermediates going back and
forth just like you have in an
equilibrium situation and just to
emphasize this I'll share a little
picture here of the beach in the summer
when you don't need your winter coat and
here we have my daughter I'm in her best
friend and they are trying to empty the
ocean with this princess bucket and one
can ask the question you know is this
going to affect the tides is the ocean
going to be different but the rate at
which my daughter and Aiden fill up
their buckets and bring them over here
that's a really slow step compared to
everything that's going on in the ocean
when you have a very slow step like a
kid in a long distance with the princess
pail you don't really need to worry
about that and you can think about the
fast step as being an equilibrium this
is not being siphoned off enough to
worry about it and so that makes it
easier to solve for your intermediate
because then you can just do it by an
equilibrium expression so in the clicker
question tell me how I can do that
okay ten more seconds
all right so let's just take a look at
that so again we're writing our
equilibrium expression for the first
step products over reactants and then we
can rearrange it to solve because one of
the product here is our intermediate so
we can solve for the intermediate in
terms of K one and our reactant and then
we can substitute it in and that gives
us this so we had the 2k two here now we
have our K 1 and our n o squared and
here we have our oxygen there so now we
have a rate law that doesn't include any
intermediates all right I'm just going
to put that back up here if you didn't
get it written down now let's think of
what happens with temperature so this is
an elementary rate constant little k2 so
you increase the rate when you increase
temperature and here is our expression
again that tells us about that change so
now for the equilibrium constant the
effect of temperature depends on whether
the reaction is exothermic or
endothermic and does anyone remember
what the name of the equation is that
tells us about temperature effect with
equilibrium constants yes the Van Hoff
equation I told you that sometime in the
future I'd ask you for the name of this
equation and that time is now you don't
really need to know it but it's just fun
there's not many names for equations in
general chemistry look how similar these
equations are these are very similar
equations so we have the natural log of
rate constants here here we have the
natural log of equilibrium constants
here we have our activation energy here
we have delta h alright so if the
reaction is exothermic if we increase
the temperature what happens to our
equilibrium constant does it increase or
decrease it decreases now let's think
about what happens here so our chaos now
has a rate as an elementary rate
constant term which is going to increase
with temperature and it has an
equilibrium constant term which is going
to decrease with temperature for an
exothermic reaction so we have these
going in opposite directions so overall
we want to think about the magnitude of
our activation energy term for our rate
constants and we want to think about the
magnitude of our Delta H term in terms
of the equilibrium constants so for the
particular reaction in question you can
look up the activation energy is a small
number and Delta H again it's exothermic
and it's a big number so then if you're
thinking about that if EA is small and
positive EA is always positive there is
always a barrier always positive then
the rate constant is only going to
increase a little bit but Delta H is a
big negative number so the equilibrium
constant is going to decrease a lot so
for this particular reaction increasing
the temperature actually decreases the
chaos and so for any any reaction it
depends on the magnitude of EA and the
magnitude and the sign of Delta H so
again large EA means very sensitive to
temperature large Delta H means that the
equilibrium constant is very sensitive
to temperature for an elementary rate
constant it's always going to increase
with temperature
because EA is always positive there is
always a barrier to overcome temperature
always increases a rate constant but for
an equilibrium constant it can increase
or decrease because Delta H isn't always
positive like the activation energy
barrier it can be positive or negative
so the magnitude of Delta H how big the
number it is tells you about the
magnitude of the change how much the
equilibrium constant will change will k1
and k2 be almost like each other or
really really different from each other
those equilibrium constants and the sign
of Delta H whether it's positive or
negative tells you the direction of the
change will it increase or decrease okay
so just I just want to show where we're
going with this cuz it's just super
exciting yes we're back to the Shotley a
this is what I was so excited about
remember the chatelier's told us when we
apply is stress to the system the system
responds in such a way to minimize that
stress so if we increase the temperature
according to with chatelier's what
direction will the reaction shift so you
increase the temperature you add heat it
shifts in a direction to minimize that
or to use up that heat so we'll end with
one last clicker question and we'll
finish this concept on Monday but we
want to think about how the chatelier's
and what we've known already applies
here so why don't you tell me which of
these diagrams is exothermic and which
is endothermic because we're going to
tie this all back to temperature and
Lashelle EA
we don't have that question okay then we
will not do that question
okay so I'll just I'll just give you the
answer to that and then we'll see who
the winners are so that one is
endothermic and this one is exothermic
and we'll finish the rest of this on
Monday but for now can you tell us who
the winner is
no it's not coming up
to top to Dan and Jay have beat out the
other folks so we know is in the
playoffs all right Friday exam see you
Monday in class to finish the handout
all right let's just take 10 more
seconds on the clicker question
all right
so let's take a look at this 56% do have
the right answer so rate constants
always increase with increase of
temperature that's our little case
because there's always some activation
energy barrier to overcome there's
always a positive barrier
whereas for equilibrium constants K you
can have a reaction that's exothermic or
endothermic and so that will change that
either increases or decreases because
Delta H can be positive or negative but
activation energy barriers are always
positive there's always a barrier always
a barrier to doing anything that's
important I got to calm down with
chatelier's Welsh at Lee I tells me that
when a stress is applied to the system I
should respond in such a way to minimize
the stress it's a very calming rule in
chemistry reactions don't like stress
and they'll respond in a way to minimize
it so we've been talking about the
Shotley a since for a lot of the
semester and we've talked about the
effect of temperature on reactions
previously so if you add heat to a
reaction it will want to respond in such
a way to minimize the heat or absorb the
heat so it shifts in the endothermic
direction so we've already talked about
this and nothing is new here today but
today I'm going to give you a different
way to rationalize why that happens so
we're not changing what happens we're
just going to come up with a new way to
rationalize the Y so we ended last time
with these two diagrams and we
identified one as endothermic and one is
exothermic so these again are our
reaction coordinate diagrams we have p
on one side what is PE stand for again
potential energy
it stands for other thing
- but in a reaction coordinate diagram
that's what it is so and then the
reaction coordinate going this way so we
go from reactants to products along the
reaction coordinate so here in this
endothermic reaction we have our
reactants down here our products up here
and a very large activation energy
barrier for the forward direction a much
smaller activation energy barrier for
the reverse direction with the
exothermic reaction here we have a
smaller activation energy barrier for
the forward direction and a bigger one
for the reverse direction so let's look
at the one equation that will be on the
exam that will not be on your equation
sheet I think this is for this unit this
is the one that will be not on your
equation sheet this change in energy is
equal to the activation energy for the
forward direction of reaction minus the
activation energy for the reverse
reaction and again
this is our Delta e here and this is our
Delta e here Delta e is like Delta H if
you're talking about a gas it's 1 to 2
percent different if you're talking
about a solid or a liquid it's
negligibly different so if we look at
this endothermic reaction here we have a
big forward activation energy barrier -
a small reverse activation energy
barrier so that's going to give us a
positive value for Delta e and it'll be
an endothermic reaction and if we look
at this equation again and fill it in
for and the exothermic reaction we have
a small barrier in the forward direction
a big barrier in the reverse direction
and a negative value for Delta e and
Delta H it's an exothermic reaction all
right now let's think about what happens
when we increase the temperature so if
we increase temperature it's a lot
easier to overcome this forward
activation energy barrier the big one
and that's going to shift it to products
and this is because the small activation
energy bear
it's not that hard to get over something
that's a small activation energy barrier
it's not hard but if it's a really big
barrier it's hard to get over that
barrier you need a lot of kinetic energy
increasing the temperature will give
that kinetic energy to overcome that
barrier remember that when molecules
come together bonds are distorted and
formed the potential energy goes up
first and only those molecules with that
critical energy that can overcome that
activation energy barrier can go on to
products increase the temperature that
allows you to overcome the big barrier
now if we look in this side this is a
small barrier they weren't really having
molecules we're probably not having a
huge amount of trouble with that barrier
the barrier that was hard was for the
reverse direction so now you increase
the temperature of an exothermic
reaction it's easier to overcome this
big barrier the reverse barrier and you
have a shift toward reactants so this is
what we had seen before you increase the
temperature of an endothermic reaction
you go to products you increase the
temperature of an exothermic reaction it
shifts to reactants so these are the
same things we saw before but now
there's a new rationalization behind it
now we can think about this in terms of
activation energy barriers okay so the
important points to remember big
activation energy barrier rate constant
very sensitive to temperature if you
have a big barrier increasing the
temperature makes a big difference if
you have a small barrier doesn't really
matter that much most your molecules can
get over that small barrier so big
barrier increasing the temperature more
molecules can go and so you're going to
shift in the direction of the big
barrier